**Incident: 2026-04-07**

**Summary**

At 6:33pm UTC, senior dev Jonah Shirts was monitoring the pizza metrics found in Grafana, when suddenly, the metric for successful and failed pizza purchases dipped. All of the pizza purchase requests being made by his simulated traffic script were failing, not a single pizza was being purchases successfully. Professor Jenson's chaos monkey had disabled the jwt pizza factory, and no pizza pruchases were being processed correctly by the 3rd party service. Jonah observed the logs for pizza factory requests and quickly identified the problem. However, the logs were insufficient, and through further inspection of the logging code, he discovered an error in the logging code. When fixed he discovered the hidden fix it url that was found in the response body. Clicking on the url cause the pizza factory to fix itself, and pizza sales resumed at 7:10pm UTC.


**Detection**

The team detected the incident very quickly, mainly because Jonah was paranoid about an impending failure. This gave us a major advantage, since we knew the failure was coming we had eyes on the dashboard. The successful/failed pizza purchases metric graph on the Grafana dashboard, allowed us to quickly identify the problem. Successful pizza purchases dropped to 0, and this was detected within 2 minutes of the initiation of the incident. After observing the graph, Jonah looked at the logs to the pizzafactory to see what was wrong. He found that every pizza factory request was given the response "FAIL". There must be something wrong with the pizza factory. 

Within 5 minutes of the incident beginning, Jonah, the oncall dev, received a push notification from the Grafana app, notifying him that the failed pizza purchases metric had passed the alert threshold. If Jonah was not staring at the metrics when the incident ocurred, this onCall notification would've really helped us to indentify the exact problem very quickly. This means the alerts placed on the pizza purchases metric were at a sufficient threshold and the onCall notification chain worked as planned.


**Impact**

For almost 40 minutes between 6:33pm UTC and 7:10pm UTC, the pizza factory was broken and user could not order pizzas. During this time of day, we usually had 3 active users, so at least 3 users were unable to sucessfully purchase pizzas for 40 minutes. We avarage around 0.002 bitcoin per minute, so therefore the total sales losses were around 0.08 bitcoin, or around $71,000. This is obviously a heavy blow to the company. However, customers did not seem to be bothered, because there were no reports or phone calls or emails given from any users.

- _6:32_ Pizza factory fails
- _6:33_ Jonah observes failure on metrics
- _6:33_ Jonah begins analyzing metrics to discover the problem
- _6:38_ Jonah receives push notification from Grafana OnCall
- _6:39_ Jonah identifies the jwt pizza factory as the problem
- _6:40_ Jonah goes to the jwt-pizza-factory website to look for clues about where the failure might've ocurred and how to fix it
- _6:48_ Jonah receives urgent push notifiction from Grafan OnCall
- _6:50_ Jonah goes to AWS to see if the servers are sending out any errors that could clue to possible solutions
- _6:55_ Jonah gets frustrated and begins looking through the server code to examine calls to the factory
- _7:00_ Jonah discovers a bug in his logging method that logs the pizza factory calls, fixes the log to include the entire response body instead of just "FAIL"
- _7:05_ Jonah  the triggers the CI pipeline to redeploy with corrected logs
- _7:10_ New logs appear and Jonah clicks on kill link
- _7:11_ Issue is resolved


**Response**

Jonah's response was pretty good, however there was an obvious error in the fact that he wrote incorrect logging code, which made finding the solution to the error much harder. If logs were correctly implemented, then the resolution would have been much faster. Detection was very quick.



**Root Cause**

An intentional chaos design implemented by Professor Jesnsen in the jwt pizza factory, which was triggered by the chaos monkey software



**Resolution**

Logs were fixed and resolution link was found. When link was pressed, the problem was immediately resovled. Alerts were marked as resolved on OnCall.



**Prevention**

I will not click on the initiate chaos button in the jwt-pizza-factory website again. That wasn't the smartest move was it? 



**Action Items**

1. Change OnCall notification grace period to 1minute instead of 5 minutes for 1st contact
2. Give Chaos monkeys more bananas so they will calm down

